In this lecture, you'll learn how to configure a Cisco router as a DHCP client. You're maybe thinking,
hang on a minute, Neil. You just told me a minute ago that our routers don't get configured as DHCP clients,
they get configured with manual IP addresses, and that is typically what will happen.
But there is one fairly common exception to that rule,
that's where a branch office is connected to the Internet, but it hasn't bought any static public IP addresses
for that office.
That would be because the branch office doesn't contain any publicly available servers that need a fixed
public IP address for incoming connections.
So, the company's decided we're not going to pay for a range of public IP addresses.
They are fixed addresses because we don't need them.
In that case, the office is still going to require at least one public IP address to allow the internal
hosts outbound connectivity to the Internet though,
and it's going to use NAT for that that we spoke about in an earlier lecture.
We're going to cover it in more detail in a later section as well.
So in that case, you're going to be having just one public IP address, but you haven't paid for a
fixed IP address
so the router is going to need to get the public IP address on its outside interface using DHCP from the Internet
service provider.
The other inside interfaces on the router will have fixed IP addresses.
It will just be that outside interface facing the service provider that is going to be a DHCP client.
So our configuration to support that is on the outside interface,
in our example here it's interface fastEthernet0/0,
we just say 'ip address dhcp', rather than the usual IP address and then the actual IP address.
And because it is a router, remember, we have to 'no shutdown' the interface.
So that's it, simple configuration to support an interface as a DHCP client. To get information about the
DHCP lease,
it's 'show dhcp lease'.
So in the example here, we can see that we were given IP address 203.0.113.2 by the
provider.
We can also see the DHCP lease server,
that's the server that gave us the IP address, and it is at 203.0.113.1.
Okay, so that's how we do the configuration.
Very simple.
Let's have a look at this in the lab.
So I'm running Packet Tracer again here, and I've already configured the Service Provider router as a DHCP server.
The outside interface on R1 is currently unconfigured, so I'm going to configure that as a DHCP
client.
So I go on to R1, and 'enable', 'config t' to get the global configuration, and I'm going to go to interface
fastEthernet0/0, 'ip address dhcp' and 'no shutdown'.
It will take a minute and then I should see it picking up the IP address and the interface going live.
In Packet Tracer,
I'll know that's happened when both sides of the link go green.
So, I'll just waffle for a second while I wait for that. Actually, let's do a 'show dhcp lease' now,
see that's picked up anything yet and it's 0.0.0.0,
so it hasn't got the DHCP address yet.
I just saw in Packet Tracer that both sides went green.
So if I repeat that 'show dhcp lease' command, I now see, okay, it still hasn't got the IP address.
Okay, and there we go.
It does take a while, but after a minute or so, I see a log message that
the DHCP address was assigned on fastEthernet0/0.
It was given IP address 203.0.113.2.
I can do my 'show dhcp lease' again,
and I see there's the address, 203.0.113.2, which was given by 203.0.113.1.
And if I do a 'show ip interface brief', I can see that for fastEthernet0/0, the method is DHCP,
and the address is 203.0.113.2.
Okay, so that was it. That's the DHCP section completed.
See you in the next one.